---
is_draft: true
---

# Feature Tests are a waste of time!?

> **Disclaimer** this is opinionated and if you are happy with your current approach, stay with it.

This post is the advanced version of my following [Tweet](https://twitter.com/devgummibeer/status/1347572548943425536) which said:

> Unpopular opinion: in-app feature and integration tests are a useless waste of time, brain capacity and CI time as long as they are written by the same developer.

## Definition of Feature Tests

First, let's clarify what I mean by _Feature Tests_, as it’s used for different meanings in multiple contexts.
I will copy the definition from [Feature Tests vs. Integration Tests vs. Unit Tests](https://mixandgo.com/learn/feature-tests-vs-integration-tests-vs-unit-tests-in-ruby-and-rails), as it matches my definition.

> With feature tests, you are testing the application by interacting with it just like a real user would do. So they are integration tests.
> You click on links, buttons, fill in forms, interact with popups, etc.

## Parts of my statement

You thought that I would damn a whole quality assurance department? No!

### Different developers

My first requirement, as stated in the tweet, is that feature tests should be written by another developer than the tested code was.
For me, that’s the most important condition and applies the same for nearly all other test types.

Tests written by the same developer usually only test what the developer has created, and not the actual expectation.
They also tend to be very optimistic, as the developer believes that the requested feature is fully solved - hopefully they wouldn’t push otherwise.
The problem here is that it likely ends with shallow tests.

Another benefit of having another developer writing the tests is that you have at least two developers knowing the feature and code in depth after release.

### Unit/Integration Tests vs Feature Tests

As an example I will choose the cart page of an eCommerce site.
One of the more complex things is the price calculation - sum-up all cart lines, apply coupons, calculate taxes, get shipping costs and so on.

You likely have one or multiple services doing the work. Each should be unit tested, so you know that your price calculation works.
Which benefits will you get from feature tests now?
Your feature tests can test that the cart page renders all cart lines, the increment button increases the item quantity and the correct total price is displayed below the table.

If that’s what you want to test, do it! It’s useful if you have a bunch of JS in place, possibly a SPA framework or just even an app so complex that you want to automatically test that everything works.
The perfect tool for this is something like Selenium, which runs a browser and interacts with it like a user.

But in reality, a lot of tests I’ve seen try to test business logic with feature tests. So they open the cart page several times with several database dumps to check if it shows the correct cart lines and correctly calculates the prices.
If you already have unit tests in your suite, this is only test duplication - if not, write them in the first place!

Writing feature tests is much more complex than writing unit tests. So doing unit test things in feature tests is a waste of time, lines of code and brain capacity.

### Time and Costs

Developer time is precious and no one wants to burn money.  
As said before, writing feature tests is a complex task and takes time. If they aren’t required, it’s time your developers spend on doing something unneeded.

The second part is that running feature tests is time intensive, as they have to boot a browser, open and render every page, do something and wait for expectation. A normal feature test suite runs several minutes by default. Let's take a very low amount and calculate with 5 minutes per run.
GitHub Actions cost $0.008 per minute, so a single run costs 4 cents ($0.04). Assuming you have 2 developers triggering CI five times per day, this is 40 cents per day.

```
$0.40 = $0,008 * 5 minutes * 2 developers * 5 times/day
```

That’s 2 dollars per week and between 8-9 dollars per month.
All these numbers are pretty low.
Using some real-world numbers now: for one of my past projects, that’s more like $128 per month - `$0,008 * 10mins * 4devs * 20push * 5days * 4weeks`.

The costs are one point which you possibly are willing to spend. Another downside is the waiting time for your developers.
If they have to wait several minutes to get CI feedback after every push, they will waste some hours per week just by waiting for this little spinner to get red or green.

That’s the reason why larger companies who have both unit and feature tests in place don't run the feature tests on every push. It’s also not part of their immediate developer feedback cycle as that’s what is covered by the unit tests.
They run the feature tests on a schedule, or if a release is prepared, or something like this. This way, they can reduce the costs, developer wait time and still have a fully tested app before deployment.

### Catch bugs early

This is like the sum of the previous two chapters. You should always try to catch bugs as early as possible. This means as near as possible to the origin of the bug (the specific line of code) and also as fast as possible after the bug was introduced (time after push).
For both of these goals, feature tests aren’t good as they test a whole request for example and take some time. If one of your feature tests tells you that the total price on the cart page is wrong you have several options:

1. The assertion is wrong as it was written as a shallow test
2. The view layer somehow manipulates the data - for example, it rounds the number to format it
3. The price service has a problem which the related unit tests haven’t covered

Checking all of them will take time and possibly even a second developer, as it’s a lot of times this little thing somewhere you will never notice as you read what you think is there and not what’s there.

### Testdata matrix complexity

In our price calculation example, we need a lot of test data - products in the cart, shipping address, country for tax and a coupon. All of them in different combinations.
Testing them in different unit tests means that we can have four group to test these specific things:

- summing-up the products prices,
- getting the shipping cost by delivery address
- calculating tax depending on the invoice address
- applying optional coupons

Let's assume that we have 5 different data sets per service, which means that we have `5runs/service * 4services = 20runs` in total. Possibly five more tests to test that they work properly together.
Covering the same in feature tests means that we have a matrix, so would end up with `5 * 5 * 5 * 5 = 625tests`! To be honest, no one will write this amount of feature test data sets. And time is another factor, as even if every test run only takes one to two seconds, it would take between 10 to 20 minutes in total. So you will very likely decrease the data sets or don’t use a matrix and instead combine the first sets in one run, the second sets in one and so on.
But even then, it’s harder to debug if you have a dataset with several products, two addresses and a coupon.

## Conclusion

Feature tests aren’t always a waste of time, but you should know what they are made for and only use them for this. By having a second developer writing the tests you also get better tests and have two devs knowing the feature. Your business logic should be covered by unit and integration tests (testing multiple units together). Don’t run feature tests on every push to keep your costs low and don’t let your devs waste time while waiting.

Feature tests are the last instance of testing. When you have unit tests, integration tests and manual testing and still have bugs, you would save time and money by replacing manual testing with automated browser tests.
