---
title: "Font opimization with Glyphhanger"
categories:
  - tips+tricks
  - css
image: images/posts/2021-01-20.font-optimization-with-glyphhanger.jpg
image_credits: "Photo by [Natalia Y](https://unsplash.com/@foxfox) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/bMybTSV7RFY)"
author: gummibeer
description: "A guide how to optimize webfonts with Glyphhanger by subsetting."
---

As web-vitals and site performance is on it's way to a SEO factor I've checked my own website if there's anything I can optimize.
After checking current performance the biggest part of my website were webfonts - I use 3 fonts in multiple font weights on my website. Before optimization this resulted in 10 requests summing up to 1MB traffic.

So I started my search how to optimize this. I already use Cloudflare CDN with aggressive caching in browser and edge. The next was checking if I can reduce the amount of requests. Yes, I were able to drop some font weights used only once. Next idea, try to reduce the filesize - that's what this article is about as for the other step there are enough tutorials out there.

## Subsetting

One way to reduce the filesize of a font is to subset it - this means to remove character definitions from the file. You can think about it as PurgeCSS for fonts.

[Google Fonts](https://developers.google.com/fonts/docs/getting_started#specifying_script_subsets) has two ways to do this. Select subsets like `latin, greek, cyrillic` or provide a list of characters you need.

As I'm not using Google Fonts this wasn't a real option - but if they can do it on runtime there must be any kind of script/tool to do this.

## Glyphhanger

The solution I've found is [filamentgroup/glyphhanger](https://github.com/filamentgroup/glyphhanger) which provides an impressive CLI API. Right after installing it I got my first errors as a python library is missing and because of some clang stuff on MacOS Big Sur also unable to compile.

So next try, check if there's a docker image that will allow me to use it. For sure there is one [Worie/docker-glyphhanger)](https://github.com/Worie/docker-glyphhanger) which also provides a bash alias to use it as if it's installed locally.
The alias is `glyphy` every argument stays the same as with the native one - my examples will use the alias.

For me I had two fonts I were able to subset. The font used in my logo/name `Permanent Marker` as it has a finite list of characters that will "never" change. And my default body font `Inter` which I could subset to `latin` as It's very unlikely that I will write something in cyrillic.
Except of those two options glyphhanger provides a lot more functionality - which I didn't needed but you can read in the documentation.

### Character list

First my logo font - you can use the `--whitelist` option to provide a list of characters you want to keep. In my case that's `TomWitkowski`.

```bash
glyphy --whitelist=TomWitkowski --subset=fonts/permanent-marker-400.woff --formats=woff
```

This command will create a new file only containing my name in `woff` format at `fonts/permanent-marker-400-subset.woff`.

One cool thing about `@font-face` in CSS is the [unicode-range](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) property which allows you to define the characters this font contains. So this font will never get loaded if there isn't at least one of the listed characters on the page.

The CSS for my new font is as follows:

```css
@font-face {
  font-family: "Permanent Marker";
  font-style: normal;
  font-display: swap;
  font-weight: 400;
  unicode-range: U+54, U+57, U+69, U+6B, U+6D, U+6F, U+73, U+74, U+77;
  src: local("Permanent Marker Regular"), local("Permanent Marker-Regular"),
    url("../fonts/permanent-marker-400-subset.woff") format("woff");
}
```

As you can see - nothing really special except the `unicode-range` - don't worry, glyphhanger will output the `unicode-range` so you can copy it.

### Character set

The second option is to subset by oe of the predefined character sets - in my case it will be `latin`. To do so glyphhanger provides shorthand options.

```bash
glyphy --LATIN --subset=fonts/inter-*.woff --formats=woff
```

This command will process all `woff` files starting with `inter-` in the `fonts` directory and only keep the latin character set.

The CSS for this will be the same as above but with a different `unicode-range` you can copy again from the glyphhanger output.

## Licenses

[@stauffermatt](https://twitter.com/stauffermatt/status/1349913479067693063) mentioned that not every license allows you to modify the files. As subsetting removes character from the font it's a font modification - so check your license before doing it.

## Caching

This is another point you should keep in mind while selecting your list of characters. One of the best ways to optimize your sites performance is caching on the client side.
So if you change the used font files on every page or after every deployment the user has to download a new file. So you should choose a set that will contain all characters used across your whole website and will also be enough for several months.
That's why I've decided to go for the `latin` set instead of crawling my page as this could lead to font changes with every new article I publish.
