---
title: "Dynamic Route Model Binding in Laravel Eloquent"
categories:
  - laravel
  - tips+tricks
image: images/posts/2023-08-30.dynamic-route-model-binding.jpg
author: gummibeer
description: "Explore elegant solutions for resolving model binding, whether through named scopes for simplicity or custom query builders for precision."
promoted_at: null
---

Laravel's Eloquent ORM offers a robust toolkit for simplifying database interactions, and one of its standout features is route model binding.
This mechanism automatically injects model instances into route closures or controller methods, streamlining your application's workflow.
In this blog post, we'll explore two innovative approaches to resolving route model binding, whether you're using scopes or custom query builders, to cater to various complexities in your Laravel applications.

## The Challenge: Resolving Route Model Binding with Special Conditions

In the realm of Laravel development, scenarios often arise where route model binding encounters special conditions.
Whether you're dealing with intricate scope requirements or necessitate a custom query builder, we'll guide you through both solutions to empower your development journey.

## Leveraging Scopes for Enhanced Model Binding

Scopes in Laravel are a potent means of adding specific constraints to your queries.
When it comes to route model binding, you can creatively use scopes to achieve precise model resolution.
Let's dive into how you can extend the default resolver to work with named scopes:

```php
<?php

namespace App\Models;

use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Builder;
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;

abstract class BaseModel extends Model
{
    public function resolveRouteBinding($value, $field = null): ?BaseModel
    {
        $field ??= $this->getRouteKeyName();
        $scope = Str::studly('where_' . $field);
        $hasScope = $this->hasNamedScope($scope);

        return $query
            ->when(
                value: $hasScope,
                callback: fn (Builder $q) => $q->scopes([$scope => $value]),
                default: fn (Builder $q) => $q->where($field, $value),
            )
            ->first();
    }
}
```

## Harnessing Custom Query Builders for Flexibility

In cases where scopes fall short, custom query builders come to the rescue.
These builders enable you to define complex conditions tailored to your application's requirements.
Here's how to adapt the custom resolver for custom query builders:

```php
<?php

namespace App\Models;

use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Builder;
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;

abstract class BaseModel extends Model
{
    public function resolveRouteBinding($value, $field = null): ?BaseModel
    {
        $field ??= $this->getRouteKeyName();
        $query = static::query();
        $method = 'where_' . $field;
        $hasMethod = method_exists($query, $method);

        return $query
            ->when(
                value: $hasMethod,
                callback: fn (Builder $q) => $q->$method($value),
                default: fn (Builder $q) => $q->where($field, $value),
            )
            ->first();
    }
}
```

## Unified Insights: Empowering Your Model Binding

Both approaches to resolving route model binding share a common foundation while catering to different complexities.
The first variant, utilizing scopes, maintains elegance and efficiency for straightforward use cases.
On the other hand, the second variant, involving custom query builders, offers an advanced level of customization for intricate conditions.
Depending on your scenario, you can choose the solution that best aligns with your project's needs.

## Conclusion: Your Route to Elevated Model Binding

In this comprehensive blog post, we've delved into two ingenious methods for mastering route model binding in Laravel.
Whether you're navigating through straightforward scenarios or tackling intricate challenges, you now have the tools to ensure efficient and effective model binding.
Leverage scopes when you seek simplicity and quick wins, and turn to custom query builders when your requirements demand tailored precision.
By incorporating these techniques into your Laravel toolkit, you're equipped to create exceptional applications that effortlessly harness the power of Eloquent.
