---
title: "Advanced Carbon Techniques in Laravel for Data Integrity"
categories:
  - laravel
  - tips+tricks
image: images/posts/2023-08-28.carbon-techniques-in-laravel.jpg
author: gummibeer
description: "Discover the advanced world of Carbon manipulation in Laravel. Building upon the foundation of Immutable Carbon, this article dives into expert techniques recommended by Alexander von Studnitz."
promoted_at: 2023-08-31T12:02:21+00:00
---

In my [previous exploration](/blog/2023/preserving-date-integrity/), I delved into the significance of Immutable Carbon in Laravel, emphasizing date integrity and preventing unintended mutations.
In response to insightful [feedback from Alexander von Studnitz](https://twitter.com/jvstudnitz/status/1689309097714225153), I'm back to expand your understanding further.
With these valuable insights, let's delve into advanced Carbon techniques that elevate your Laravel experience.

## Introducing `->avoidMutation()`

Building on the concept of immutability, Carbon introduces `->avoidMutation()`.
This nifty method allows you to seamlessly transform mutable Carbon objects into CarbonImmutable instances only when necessary, enhancing flexibility while preserving data integrity.

## Global Implementation of CarbonImmutable

Laravel offers a genius solution to ensure that `now()` and similar functions return `CarbonImmutable` instances by default.
Place the following code in your `AppServiceProvider->boot()` method:

```php
<?php

namespace App\Providers;

use Carbon\CarbonImmutable;
use Illuminate\Support\DateFactory;
use Illuminate\Support\ServiceProvider;

class AppServiceProvider extends ServiceProvider
{
    public function boot(): void
    {
        DateFactory::useClass(CarbonImmutable::class);
    }
}
```

This simple addition guarantees consistent usage of `CarbonImmutable` across your application, impacting eloquent attribute casting, various Carbon-related calls, and even affecting methods like `$request->date()` in controllers.

## Embracing `immutable_datetime` Casts with Caution

Should you choose not to override the default date class in your service provider (as described in point 2), consider adopting the `immutable_datetime` cast for attributes like `published_at`.
This automatically casts attributes to `CarbonImmutable` instances, ensuring uniformity in your application's data.

```php
protected $casts = [
    'published_at' => 'immutable_datetime',
];
```

## Conclusion

By adopting advanced Carbon techniques and integrating `->avoidMutation()`, setting up `CarbonImmutable` globally, and leveraging `immutable_datetime` casts where applicable, you're not only safeguarding your data but also optimizing your Laravel development journey.
This tailored approach empowers you to build applications that adhere to best practices, thanks to the synergy between Carbon and Laravel.
